README.md, before:

# paper_river

This is a small repo where I place all the articles that I read so far. Here
you will find a general information, description and some tags. Here you will
**not** find the pdf version or the link to the article. Also, in the _notes_
directory you will find some... notes... from the articles.

## Articles

**Adversarial super-resolution of climatological wind and solar data**

- Stengel, Glaws, Hettinger & N. King. 2020.
- Description: Use of deep learning (convolutional neural network) to increase
  the spatial resolution of wind and solar radiation outputs from climate
  projections.
- Tags: Machine Learning, Downscaling.
- [Notes](notes/2020-Stengel-Adversarial_super_resolution_of_climatological_wind_and_solar_data.md)

**Top ten European heat-waves since 1950 and their occurrence in the coming decades**

- Russo, Sillmann & M Fischer. 2015.
- Description: Classification  of the 10 strongest heat-waves in Europe using
  HWMId index and the future projections.
- Tags: Heat waves, climate change.
- [Notes](notes/2015-Russo-Top_ten_european_heatwaves_since_1950_and_their_occurrence_in_the_coming_decades.md)

**Magnitude and frequency of heat and cold waves in recent decades: the case of South America**

- Ceccherini, Russo, Amestoy, Romero & Carmona Moreno. 2016.
- **Description:** Analysis of heat and cold waves in South America using
  weather stations and analysing how these events change over time.
- Tags: Heat waves, Cold waves, South America.
- [Notes](notes/2016-Ceccherini-Magnitude_and_frequency_of_heat_and_cold_waves_in_recent_decades_SA.md)

Commit message:

Review of heat waves and health
Add information and notes for the article "Heatwave and health impact
research" by Campbel (2018).

README.md, after:

# paper_river

This is a small repo where I place all the articles that I read so far. Here
you will find a general information, description and some tags. Here you will
**not** find the pdf version or the link to the article. Also, in the _notes_
directory you will find some... notes... from the articles.

## Articles

**Adversarial super-resolution of climatological wind and solar data**

- Stengel, Glaws, Hettinger & N. King. 2020.
- Tags: Machine Learning, Downscaling.
- Description: Use of deep learning (convolutional neural network) to increase
  the spatial resolution of wind and solar radiation outputs from climate
  projections.
- [Notes](notes/2020-Stengel-Adversarial_super_resolution_of_climatological_wind_and_solar_data.md)

**Top ten European heat-waves since 1950 and their occurrence in the coming decades**

- Russo, Sillmann & M Fischer. 2015.
- Tags: Heat waves, climate change.
- Description: Classification  of the 10 strongest heat-waves in Europe using
  HWMId index and the future projections.
- [Notes](notes/2015-Russo-Top_ten_european_heatwaves_since_1950_and_their_occurrence_in_the_coming_decades.md)

**Magnitude and frequency of heat and cold waves in recent decades: the case of South America**

- Ceccherini, Russo, Amestoy, Romero & Carmona Moreno. 2016.
- Tags: Heat waves, Cold waves, South America.
- **Description:** Analysis of heat and cold waves in South America using
  weather stations and analysing how these events change over time.
- [Notes](notes/2016-Ceccherini-Magnitude_and_frequency_of_heat_and_cold_waves_in_recent_decades_SA.md)

**Heatwave and health impact research: A global review**

- Campbell, Remenyi, White & Johnston. 2018.
- Tags: Heat waves, Health.
- **Description:** Review of several articles related to heat waves to address
  how this are related to health across the globe.
- [Notes](notes/2018-Campbell-Heatwave_and_health_impact_research_A_global_review.md)
