# Information

**Seasonal variability in precipitation in central and southern Chile:
Modulation by the South Pacific High**

- Barrett & Hameed
- 2017
- Journal of Climate Vol. 30

# Notes

Some articles to check regarding SPH:

    - Grotjahn 2004.
    - Grimm et al. 2000.

The primary objective of this study was to explore the extent to which
precipitation varied with surface pressure associated with the SPH.

On the inter-annual time scale, ENSO has been found to be moderately to
occasionally strongly correlated with winter season Chilean precipitation.
However, because a large fraction of annual precipitation is associated with
frontal passages, and because these frontal passages are related to variability
in large-scale circulation features (including SPH), it is critically important
to directly explore the relationship between the SPH and precipitation.

The intensity index is a measure of the anomaly of the atmospheric mass over
a specific area. The latitude and longitude of the SPH represent the location of
the center of the atmospheric mass over the domain.

If heating over a particular region contributes to subsidence over the SPH, then
there should be a positive correlation between the rates of heating and the SPH
pressure. This is done to investigate the possible physical relationship between
SPH and remotely located regions of diabatic heating.

In Chile, SPH intensity and longitude is negative correlated to precipitation,
while strong positive correlation is found with latitude. For the rest of the
continent, the correlation is negative with latitude. This dipole suggests that
SPH is connected to large-scale patterns controlling precipitation across much of
the continent. This pattern is better seen in winter as well

SPH intensity is related to convective activity over both the Indian Ocean and
Indonesian monsoon regions as well as the equatorial, subtropical and
extratropical Pacific.

The results of a multiple linear regression confirmed the importance of SPH
intensity and longitude, and the unimportance of latitude in hindcasting winter
precipitation in central an south-central Chile.

In winter, precipitation is mostly a result of frontal passages and moisture
advection associated with mid-latitude cyclones. As such, a weaker and
westward-displaced SPH would allow for a greater precipitation from these low
pressure systems. Additionally, SPH is further north in winter, which neglects
the effect of latitude. This, of course, changes in the other seasons with more
influence of latitude.
