# Information

**Unconditional or conditional logistic regression model for age-matched
case-control data**

- Authors: Kuo, Duan & Grady
- Year: 2018
- Journal: Frontiers in Public Health. Vol. 6
- doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00057
- Tags:
    - [Log] Logistic regression model.
    - [C-C] Case-control design study.

# Notes

## Introduction

Some variables, like age, sex, and race, are common confounders and the
distribution of these variables may differ between case and control groups. This
could cause a spurious association in a random sampling. Matching is a method to
tackle this issue.

Sparse data problem arises when there is not enough data to sample significant
large strata. Conditional logistic regression is used in this situations.

In this study, the authors analyze the "loose matching" created by demographic
variables. Under this situation, they hypothesize that unconditional logistic
regression can be used.

## Material and methods

Both conditional and unconditional logistic regression equations are presented,
as well as a brief explanation of the variables used.

They also described all the parameters and equations needed for the simulations.
This includes the disease risk, the probability of developing the disease, and
others.

## Results

_Didn't understand._

## Discussion

"Unconditional and conditional logistic regression models perform similarly in
testing and estimation except when the age distribution of exposed and unexposed
subjects are 20 years apart."

# Bibtex

@article{Kuo_2018,
    author={Kuo, Chia-Ling and Duan, Yinghui and Grady, James},   
    title={Unconditional or Conditional Logistic Regression Model for Age-Matched Case–Control Data?},
    journal={Frontiers in Public Health},
    volume={6},
    year={2018},
    url={https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpubh.2018.00057},
    doi={10.3389/fpubh.2018.00057},
    issn={2296-2565},
}

