notes/Green-2019.md, before:

# Information

**Impact of heat on mortality and morbidity in low and middle income countries:
A review of the epidemiological evidence and considerations for future research**

- Green et al.
- 2019
- Environmental Research 171, 80-91

# Notes

## Introduction

Worldwide, the frequency, duration and intensity of heat waves have increased in
the last half-century and are expected to continue along this trajectory.
Although there are some benefits from the warming such as reduced cold-related
mortality, this benefit primarily occur in temperate regions. _Check references_

Heat stroke occur when high ambient temperature increases the demand of the human
cardiovascular system to pump more blood the skin in order to cool it down. This
increase on the physiological system has been associated with increased risk of
mortality by respiratory, cardiovascular, and related cardiovascular diseases.

Most of the epidemiological studies analyses the effects of temperature either as
a continuous or binary variable.

There is documentation of a J or U shape non-linear relationship between
temperature and mortality. Also, temperature thresholds can be higher in
low-latitude regions due to age structure, socio-economic factors, or
acclimatization.

The health effects of heat weigh the heaviest in disadvantaged populations such
as the elderly and those with low socio-economic status. However, most of the
studies has taken place in high income countries, which have undergone extensive
planning and technological development to adapt against heat waves. As
a consequence, such studies cannot be extrapolated to all regions, specifically
low and middle income countries (LMICs) for which heat-health studies and
epidemiological evidence are sparse.

## Methodology

The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA)
was used to conduct the study. The aim is to identify the relevant literature,
not to evaluate the quality of the studies.

The estimates of association were extracted from the selected studies. When
different lag effects were presented, only associations for the shortest lag were
considered.

## Results and Discussion

Over 70.6% of the studies for LMICs are located in Asia, with a 56.2% in China
alone.

There are gaps in the representation of lower income and lower middle income
countries in heat-impact assessment. Upper middle countries have the capacity and
data available to conduct this type of study.

Vast majority of the studies (83.6%) assessed the association of high temperature
and morbidity/mortality. Only 13% assessed the association with heat with
different definitions of heat wave and different association definitions with
morbidity/mortality. For both cases, time series analysis is more commonly found
with case-cross over analysis far behind.

Almost all the studies examined the effect over non-communicable diseases, with
cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases being the most common analyzed
(34.9% and 32.2% respectively). However, there are some studies that analyzes the
effects over communicable diseases like malaria.

In case of vulnerable groups, studies often chose to report the effects for
specific subgroups, such as age, sex and socio-economic status. The results are
not consistent between each other, with a wide range of values. In general, the
elderly, women, and those with low socio-economic status were more vulnerable to
heat effects.

The vast majority of studies found a positive association between heat and
morbidity/mortality. This study highlights the importance of further studying
socio-economic status, since it has been shown to be affect susceptibility to
heat-related mortality/morbidity.

## Limitations

The heterogeneity between the different studies was too great to conduct
a meta-analysis. The heterogeneity is also present between countries and some of
them resemble cities from developed countries. Also, the majority of the studies
were conducted in China which could bias the results. Lastly, there was no
assessment of the quality of the studies, the main goal was to assess the level
of existing evidence of the impact of temperature on human health in LMICs.

## Challenges

Regarding epidemiological methods, they recommend that studies include different
contrast measures (as a sensitivity analysis for instance), especially when
evaluating if some population subgroups are more vulnerable to heat.
Additionally, due to the non-linear nature of the relationship between
temperature and health effects, linear methods are not appropriate to compare
across these impacts. Instead, case-cross over designs or methods that include
lagged effects (like the Distributed Lag Non-Linear Models DLNM) are recommended.
It is also important to clarify the role of air pollutants in heat-health
studies.

## More

Because nearly all heatwave-related deaths are preventable, heatwave early and
response warning systems are being implemented worldwide.

Commit message:

Adding Tags
Creating a file with all the tags used in the repo. Also all notes
include tags, whether could be new ones or updated.

notes/Green-2019.md, after:

# Information

**Impact of heat on mortality and morbidity in low and middle income countries:
A review of the epidemiological evidence and considerations for future research**

- Authors: Green, Bailey, Schwarz, Vanos, Ebi & Benmarhnia.
- Year: 2019.
- Journal: Environmental Research 171, 80-91.
- DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.010
- Tags:
    - [Mort] Mortality.
    - [Morb] Morbidity.
    - [3W] Third world countries.
    - [Heat] Heat extremes.

# Notes

## Introduction

Worldwide, the frequency, duration and intensity of heat waves have increased in
the last half-century and are expected to continue along this trajectory.
Although there are some benefits from the warming such as reduced cold-related
mortality, this benefit primarily occur in temperate regions. _Check references_

Heat stroke occur when high ambient temperature increases the demand of the human
cardiovascular system to pump more blood the skin in order to cool it down. This
increase on the physiological system has been associated with increased risk of
mortality by respiratory, cardiovascular, and related cardiovascular diseases.

Most of the epidemiological studies analyses the effects of temperature either as
a continuous or binary variable.

There is documentation of a J or U shape non-linear relationship between
temperature and mortality. Also, temperature thresholds can be higher in
low-latitude regions due to age structure, socio-economic factors, or
acclimatization.

The health effects of heat weigh the heaviest in disadvantaged populations such
as the elderly and those with low socio-economic status. However, most of the
studies has taken place in high income countries, which have undergone extensive
planning and technological development to adapt against heat waves. As
a consequence, such studies cannot be extrapolated to all regions, specifically
low and middle income countries (LMICs) for which heat-health studies and
epidemiological evidence are sparse.

## Methodology

The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA)
was used to conduct the study. The aim is to identify the relevant literature,
not to evaluate the quality of the studies.

The estimates of association were extracted from the selected studies. When
different lag effects were presented, only associations for the shortest lag were
considered.

## Results and Discussion

Over 70.6% of the studies for LMICs are located in Asia, with a 56.2% in China
alone.

There are gaps in the representation of lower income and lower middle income
countries in heat-impact assessment. Upper middle countries have the capacity and
data available to conduct this type of study.

Vast majority of the studies (83.6%) assessed the association of high temperature
and morbidity/mortality. Only 13% assessed the association with heat with
different definitions of heat wave and different association definitions with
morbidity/mortality. For both cases, time series analysis is more commonly found
with case-cross over analysis far behind.

Almost all the studies examined the effect over non-communicable diseases, with
cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases being the most common analyzed
(34.9% and 32.2% respectively). However, there are some studies that analyzes the
effects over communicable diseases like malaria.

In case of vulnerable groups, studies often chose to report the effects for
specific subgroups, such as age, sex and socio-economic status. The results are
not consistent between each other, with a wide range of values. In general, the
elderly, women, and those with low socio-economic status were more vulnerable to
heat effects.

The vast majority of studies found a positive association between heat and
morbidity/mortality. This study highlights the importance of further studying
socio-economic status, since it has been shown to be affect susceptibility to
heat-related mortality/morbidity.

## Limitations

The heterogeneity between the different studies was too great to conduct
a meta-analysis. The heterogeneity is also present between countries and some of
them resemble cities from developed countries. Also, the majority of the studies
were conducted in China which could bias the results. Lastly, there was no
assessment of the quality of the studies, the main goal was to assess the level
of existing evidence of the impact of temperature on human health in LMICs.

## Challenges

Regarding epidemiological methods, they recommend that studies include different
contrast measures (as a sensitivity analysis for instance), especially when
evaluating if some population subgroups are more vulnerable to heat.
Additionally, due to the non-linear nature of the relationship between
temperature and health effects, linear methods are not appropriate to compare
across these impacts. Instead, case-cross over designs or methods that include
lagged effects (like the Distributed Lag Non-Linear Models DLNM) are recommended.
It is also important to clarify the role of air pollutants in heat-health
studies.

## More

Because nearly all heatwave-related deaths are preventable, heatwave early and
response warning systems are being implemented worldwide.

# Bibtex

@article{Green_2019,
    title = {Impact of heat on mortality and morbidity in low and middle income countries: A review of the epidemiological evidence and considerations for future research},
    journal = {Environmental Research},
    volume = {171},
    pages = {80-91},
    year = {2019},
    issn = {0013-9351},
    doi = {https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.010},
    url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935119300106},
    author = {Hunter Green and Jennifer Bailey and Lara Schwarz and Jennifer Vanos and Kristie Ebi and Tarik Benmarhnia},
    keywords = {Heat, Heat waves, Vulnerability, LMICs, Population health, Temperature, Temperature-related mortality},
}
