# Information

**The impact of cold weather on respiratory morbidity at Emory Healthcare in
Atlanta**

- Authors: Lane, Walawender, Brownsword, Pu, Saikawa, Kraft & Davis.
- Year: 2022.
- Journal: Science of the Total Environment 813
- DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.152612
- Tags:
    - [CxO] Case-crossover.
    - [Log] Logistic regression model.
    - [DLNM] Distributed Lag Non-linear Model.
    - [Cold] Cold extremes.
    - [Morb] Morbidity.
    - [USA] USA.

# Notes

- "Research on temperature and respiratory hospitalizations is lacking in the
  southeastern US where cold weather is relatively rare". _I like that phrase._

## Context

Research over the past decade that has elucidated linkages between weather and
influenza has emphasized mortality in mid-latitude cities (...) other studies
have examined these linkages in tropical and sub-tropical locations, where cold,
dry air is virtually nonexistent. _Could be a nice source of articles._

Pneumonia and influenza are often combined in analyses because their symptomology
and treatment are similar, influenza diagnostic testing is not always done, and
mortality from influenza is coded as pneumonia.

The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) is used to predict a patient's risk of death
within one year of hospitalization for patients with specific comorbid
conditions.

## Methodology

A case-crossover (time-stratified) analysis was conducted to determine whether
emergency department visits and inpatient admissions were elevated during, and
immediately following, cold waves as compared to control periods when no cold
waves occurred. Cold days were defined as those days in which temperature was at
least one standard deviation below the 30-year mean for that day. Cold waves were
defined as a minimum of three cold days, and a cold wave was terminated by two
consecutive days that did no exceed the cold threshold.

The time-stratified case-crossover approach alleviates the need to control for
time-varying factors, such as trends and seasonality. Thus, each cold wave is
associated with a control period within the same 28-day range, and that control
period cannot also include a different cold wave. Odds ratios were calculated
using conditional logistic regression. Because there is often a substantial time
lag in the cold season between a putative impactful weather event and any
subsequent morbidity, these analyses were extended out through a lag of 21 days.
They also conducted this analysis for different groups organized by sex, race,
age, and co-morbidity by re-running the model on each subset across the 21-day
lag. After obtaining the odds ratios for each subgroup, they compared them using
a test of interaction at each lag to determine whether there was a significant
difference between subgroups. The purpose of the analysis is to assess increment
of odd ratios for emergency department visit and inpatient admission.

They developed Generalized Additive Models to estimate the relative risk of
emergency department visits and inpatient admissions related to weather. To
determine the likelihood of elevated or reduced morbidity at specific lags,
a Distributed Lag Non-linear Model was employed. The purpose was to examine the
relationship between minimum temperature and hospital data.

## Results and discussion

Generally, at the beginning of cold waves, ED visits and IP admissions decrease.
However, around one week after a cold wave, visits and admissions increase. This
could be an effect of individuals deciding no to come to the hospital during the
coldest days. The results also align with the transmission time-line for
respiratory viruses.

The relative risk for ED visits increases on days with higher minimum
temperatures, with a difference of 30% between 21°C and -10°C. For IP, the higher
risk is found at lower temperatures. _Quite weird results, I don't agree
completely with the methodology they used._

This study point to the possibility that rapid decreases in temperature may be
more impactful than low temperature alone.

There are also important factors besides age, sex and ethnicity that influence
ED and IP which were not considered. For example, illness, vaccination status,
school or work schedules, and indoor environment.

# Bibtex

@article{Lane_2022,
    title = {The impact of cold weather on respiratory morbidity at Emory Healthcare in Atlanta},
    journal = {Science of The Total Environment},
    volume = {813},
    pages = {152612},
    year = {2022},
    issn = {0048-9697},
    doi = {https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.152612},
    url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969721076907},
    author = {Morgan A. Lane and Maria Walawender and Erik A. Brownsword and Siyan Pu and Eri Saikawa and Colleen S. Kraft and Robert E. Davis},
    keywords = {Emergency department, Hospitalizations, Cold waves, Cold-related illness},
}
